---
title: "QUIC Version Aliasing"
abbrev: "QUIC Version Aliasing"
docname: draft-duke-quic-version-aliasing-latest
date: {DATE}
category: exp
ipr: trust200902
area: Transport
workgroup: QUIC

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs, docmapping]

author:
  -
    ins: M. Duke
    name: Martin Duke
    org: Google
    email: martin.h.duke@gmail.com

normative:

informative:

--- abstract

The QUIC transport protocol preserves its future extensibility partly by
specifying its version number. There will be a relatively small number of
published version numbers for the foreseeable future. This document provides a
method for clients and servers to negotiate the use of other version numbers in
subsequent connections and encrypts Initial Packets using secret keys instead of
standard ones. If a sizeable subset of QUIC connections use this mechanism, this
should prevent middlebox ossification around the current set of published
version numbers and the contents of QUIC Initial packets, as well as improving
the protocol's privacy properties.

--- middle

# Introduction

The QUIC version number is critical to future extensibility of the protocol
({{!RFC9000}}). Past experience with other protocols, such as TLS1.3
{{?RFC8446}}, shows that middleboxes might attempt to enforce that QUIC packets
use versions known at the time the middlebox was implemented. This deters
deployment of experimental and standard versions on the internet.

Each version of QUIC has a "salt" {{!RFC9001}} that is used to derive the keys
used to encrypt Initial packets. As each salt is published in a standards
document, any observer can decrypt these packets and inspect the contents,
including a TLS Client Hello. A subsidiary mechanism like Encrypted Client Hello
{{?ECHO=I-D.ietf-tls-esni}} might protect some of the TLS fields inside a TLS
Client Hello.

This document proposes "QUIC Version Aliasing," a standard way for servers to
advertise the availability of other versions inside the cryptographic
protection of a QUIC handshake. These versions are syntactically identical to
the QUIC version in which the communication takes place, but use a different
salt. In subsequent communications, the client uses the new version number and
encrypts its Initial packets with a key derived from the provided salt. These
version numbers and salts are unique to the client.

If a large subset of QUIC traffic adopts his technique, middleboxes will be
unable to enforce particular version numbers or policy based on Client Hello
contents without incurring unacceptable penalties on users. This would
simultaneously protect the protocol against ossification and improve its privacy
properties.

## Terminology

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in RFC 2119 {{?RFC2119}}.

In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation only when in
ALL CAPS.  Lower case uses of these words are not to be interpreted as carrying
significance described in RFC 2119.

A "standard version" is a QUIC version that would be advertised in a QUIC
version negotiation and conforms to a specification. Any aliased version
corresponds to a standard version in all its formats and behaviors, except for
the version number field in long headers. To be compatible with version aliasing,
there MUST be no more than four long header packet types, and the first client
packet in a standard version MUST encode the token as if it were a QUIC version
1 initial packet. That is:

* The most significant bit MUST be 1.

* The first field after the Source Connection ID MUST be a variable-length
integer including the length of a token.

* The second field after the Destination Connection ID MUST be a field, with
length indicated by the previous field, that contains opaque data generated by
the server.

* There must be a variable-length integer that encodes the packet length,
unprotected in the header.

An "aliased version" is a version with a number generated in accordance with
this document. Except for the version field in long headers, it conforms
entirely to the specification of the standard version.

# Protocol Overview

When they instantiate a connection, servers select an alternate 32-bit version
number, and optionally an initial token extension, for the next connection at
random and securely derive a salt, packet Length Offset, and long header packet
type codepoints from those values using a repeatable process. They communicate
this using a transport parameter extension including the version, initial token
extension, Initial salt, Packet Length Offset, packet type codepoints, and an
expiration time for that value.

If a client next connects to that server within the indicated expiration time,
it MAY use the provided version number and encrypt its Initial Packets using a
key derived from the provided salt. It uses the provided Initial packet
codepoint. It adds the Packet Length Offset to the true packet length when
encoding it in the long header. If the server provided an Initial Token
Extension, the client puts it in the Initial Packet token field. If there is
another token the client wishes to include, it appends the Initial Token
Extension to that token. The server can reconstruct the salt and Packet Length
Offset from the requested version and token, and proceed with the connection
normally.

The Packet Length Offset provides a low-cost way for the server to verify it can
derive a valid salt from the inputs without trial decryption. This has important
security implications, as described in {{retry-injection}}.

When generating a salt and Packet Length Offset, servers can choose between
doing so randomly and storing the mapping, or using a cryptographic process to
transform the aliased version number and token extension into the salt. The two
options provide a simple tradeoff between computational complexity and storage
requirements.

Long header packets are composed identically to their standard version, except
that they use the provided packet type codepoint, version number, and packet
length offset. Initial packets additionally use any provided token extension and
are encrypted as described below.

Short header packets are unchanged when using this extension.

## Relationship to ECH and QUIC Protected Initials

The TLS Encrypted Client Hello {{ECHO}} shares some goals with
this document. It encodes an "inner" encrypted Client Hello in a TLS extension
in an "outer" Client Hello. The encryption uses asymmetric keys with the
server's public key distributed via an out-of-band mechanism like DNS. The
inner Client Hello contains any privacy-sensitive information and is only
readable with the server's private key.

Significantly, unlike QUIC Version Aliasing, ECH can operate on the first
connection between a client and server. However, from the second connection
QUIC version aliasing provides additional benefits. It:

* greases QUIC header fields and packet formats;

* protects all of the TLS Client Hello and Server Hello;

* mitigates Retry injection attacks;

* does not require a mechanism to distribute the public key;

* uses smaller Client Hello messages, which might allow a larger 0RTT packet
in the same datagram; and

* relies on computationally cheap symmetric encryption.

If ECH is operating in "Split Mode", where a client-facing server is using the
SNI information to route to a backend server, the client-facing server MUST
have the cryptographic context relevant to version aliasing at the backend
server to successfully extract the SNI for routing purposes. Furthermore, either
all backend servers must share this context, or the client-facing server must
trial decrypt the incoming packet with all possible derived salts.

Note that in the event of the server losing state, the two approaches have a
similar fallback: ECH uses information in the outer Client Hello, and Version
Aliasing requires a connection using a standard version. In either case,
maintaining privacy requires the outer or standard version Client Hello to
exclude privacy-sensitive information. However, ECH will allow confidential
transmission of data in 1 RTT, while Version Aliasing requires 2 RTTs to resume.
This mechanism is also relevant to mitigation of downgrade attacks (see
{{downgrade}}).

Similarly, the QUIC Protected Initial
{{?QUIC-PI=I-D.duke-quic-protected-initial}} uses the ECH distribution mechanism
to generate secure initial keys and Retry integrity tags. While still dependent
on a key distribution system, asymmetric encryption, and relatively large Initial
packets, it offers similar protection properties to Version Aliasing while still
not greasing the version field.

A maximally privacy-protecting client might use Protected Initials for any
connection attempts for which it does not have an unexpired aliased version, and
QUIC version aliasing otherwise.

See also section 1.1 of {{QUIC-PI}} for further discussion of tradeoffs.

# The Version Alias Transport Parameter

## Aliased Version Number Generation

Servers MUST use a random process to generate version numbers. This version
number MUST NOT correspond to a QUIC version the server advertises in QUIC
Version Negotiation packets or transport parameters. Servers SHOULD also
exclude version numbers used in known specifications or experiments to avoid
confusion at clients, whether or not they have plans to support those
specifications.

Servers MAY use version numbers reserved for grease in Section 15.1 of
{{RFC9000}}, even though they might be advertised in Version Negotiation Packets.

Servers MUST NOT use client-controlled information (e.g. the client IP address)
in the random process, see {{salt-polling}}.

Servers MUST NOT advertise these versions in QUIC Version Negotiation packets.

## Initial Token Extension (ITE) Generation

Servers SHOULD generate an Initial Token Extension (ITE) to provide additional
entropy in salt generation. Two clients that receive the same version number but
different extensions will not be able to decode each other's Initial Packets.

Servers MAY choose any length that will allow client Initial Packets to fit
within the minimum QUIC packet size of 1200 octets. A four-octet extension is
RECOMMENDED. The ITE MUST appear to be random to observers.

The server MUST be able to distinguish ITEs from Resumption and Retry tokens in
incoming Initial Packets that contain an aliased version number. As the server
controls the lengths and encoding of each, there are many ways to guarantee
this.

## Salt and Packet Length Offset Generation

The salt is an opaque 20-octet field. It is used to generate Initial connection
keys using the process described in {{RFC9001}}.

The Packet Length Offset is a 64-bit unsigned integer with a maximum value of
2^62 - 1.

To reduce header overhead, servers MAY consistently use a Packet Length Offset
of zero if and only if it either (1) never sends Retry packets, or (2) can
guarantee, through the use of persistent storage or other means, that it will
never lose the cryptographic state required to generate the salt before the
promised expiration time. {{retry-injection}} describes the implications if it
uses zero without meeting these conditions.

Servers MUST either generate a random salt and Packet Length Offset and store a
mapping of aliased version and ITE to salt and offset, or generate the salt and
offset using a cryptographic method that uses the version number, ITE, and only
server state that is persistent across connections.

If the latter, servers MUST implement a method that it can repeat
deterministically at a later time to derive the salt and offset from the
incoming version number and ITE. It MUST NOT use client controlled information
other than the version number and ITE; for example, the client's IP address and
port.

## Packet Type Generation

The server generates the packet type codepoint for each of the four long header
packet types (Initial, 0RTT, Handshake, and Retry). Each of these codepoints is
two bits.

Future versions of QUIC with 4 or fewer long header packet types can specify a
mapping of these fields to their types.

Note that the server needs to derive the type codepoints solely from the version
number. It cannot extract the token, and the token extension, until the packet
is identified as an Initial packet.

A straightforward implementation might take arbitrary bits from a hash of the
version number. The first two bits it reads are the codepoint for Initial
packets. The next pair of bits that is not a duplicate of the first is the
codepoint for 0RTT packets. The next pair that does not duplicate the first two
is the codepoint for Handshake packets, and the remaining codepoint is the
Retry packet.

## Standard Version Number

Servers also specify the Standard version that the client should use to guide
the wire formats and behaviors of the aliased version. This version MUST meet
the criteria to support version aliasing, and MUST either be included as a
supported version in the client's version_information transport parameter (see
{{!I-D.ietf-quic-version-negotiation}}) or be the standard version of the
current connection.

Note that servers MUST NOT accept resumption tickets or NEW_TOKEN tokens from
different standard versions. Therefore, the choice of standard version might
impact the performance of the connection that uses an aliased version. The
standard version that generated tickets and/or tokens is typically encoded in
those tickets or tokens.

There are several possible techniques for the server securely recovering the
standard version in use for an aliased connection:

* the server could store a mapping of aliased versions to standard version;

* the server could encrypt the standard version in use in the aliased version
number (note that the ITE cannot be extracted until the standard version in
use is known);

* the server only accepts one standard version for aliased versions; or

* the standard version is included as an input to the parameter generation
algorithm, and the server tries all supported standard versions and tests each
resulting Packet Length Offset for validity.

## Expiration Time

Servers should select an expiration time in seconds, measured from the instant
the transport parameter is first sent. This time SHOULD be less than the time
until the server expects to support new QUIC versions, rotate the keys used
to encode information in the version number, or rotate the keys used in salt
generation.

Furthermore, the expiration time SHOULD be short enough to frustrate a salt
polling attack ({{salt-polling}})

Conversely, an extremely short expiration time will often force the client to
use standard QUIC version numbers and salts.

## Format

This document defines a new transport parameter extension for QUIC with
provisional identifier 0x5641. The contents of the value field are indicated
below.

~~~
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                      Aliased Version (32)                     |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                     Standard Version (32)                     |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                            Salt (160)                         |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                     Packet Length Offset (i)                  |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                         Expiration (i)                        |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|INI|0RT|HAN|RET|      Initial Token Extension (variable)       |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~
{: #fig-transport-parameter title="Version Alias Transport Parameter value"}

The definition of the fields is described above. Note that the "Expiration"
field is in seconds, and its length is encoded using the Variable Length
Integer encoding from Section 16 of {{RFC9000}}.

The Packet Length Offset is also encoded as a Variable Length Integer.

INI, 0RT, HAN, and RET are the codepoints for each long header packet type. If
any two packet types have the same codepoint, the transport parameter is
invalid.

Clients can compute the length of the Initial Token Extension by subtracting
known and encoded field lengths from the overall transport parameter length.

Note that servers that support version aliasing need not send the transport
parameter on every connection. Therefore, a client MAY attempt to connect with
an unexpired aliased version, even if in its most recent connection it did not
receive the transport parameter.

Clients MAY remember the values in this transport parameter for future
connections. Servers MUST either store the contents of the transport parameter,
or preserve the state to compute the full contents based on what the client
provides.

A server that receives this transport parameter MUST close the connection with
a TRANSPORT_PARAMETER_ERROR.

## Multiple Servers for One Domain

If multiple servers serve the same entity behind a load balancer, all such
servers SHOULD either have a common configuration for encoding standard versions
and computing salts, or share a common database of mappings. They MUST NOT
generate version numbers that any of them would advertise in a Version
Negotiation Packet or Transport Parameter.

## Multiple Entities With One Load Balancer

If mutually mistrustful entities share the same IP address and port, incoming
packets are usually routed by examining the SNI at a load balancer server that
routes the traffic. This use case makes concealing the contents of the Client
Initial especially attractive, as the IP address reveals less information. There
are several solutions to solve this problem.

* All entities have a common crytographic context for deriving salts and Packet
Length Offsets from the version number and ITE. This is straightforward but also
increases the risk that the keys will leak to an attacker which could then
decode Initial packets from point where the packets are observable. This is
therefore NOT RECOMMENDED.

* Each entity has its own cryptographic context, shared with the load balancer.
This requires the load balancer to trial decrypt each incoming Initial with
each context. As there is no standard algorithm for encoding information in the
Version and ITE, this involves synchronizing the method, not just the key
material.

* Each entity reports its Version Aliasing Transport Parameters to the load
balancer out-of-band.

* Each entity is assigned certain version numbers for use. This assignment
SHOULD NOT follow observable patterns (e.g., assigning ranges to each entity),
as this would allow observers to obtain the target server based on the version.
The scheme SHOULD assign all available version numbers to maximize the entropy
of the encoding.

Note that {{ECHO}} and {{QUIC-PI}} solve this problem elegantly by only holding
the private key at the load balancer, which decodes the sensitive information on
behalf of the back-end server.

# Client Behavior {#client-behavior}

When a client receives the Version Alias Transport Parameter, it MAY cache the
version number, ITE, salt, Packet Length Offset, packet type codepoints, and the
expiration of these values. It MAY use the version number and ITE in a
subsequent connection and compute the initial keys using the provided salt.

The Client MUST NOT use the contents of a Version Alias transport parameter if
the handshake does not (1) later authenticate the server name or (2)
result in both endpoints computing the same 1-RTT keys. See {{impersonation}}.
The authenticated server name MAY be a "public name" distributed as described in
{{ECHO}} rather than the true target domain.

Clients MUST NOT advertise aliased versions in the Version Negotiation Transport
Parameter unless they support a standard version with the same number. Including
that number signals support for the standard version, not the aliased version.

Clients SHOULD NOT attempt to use the provided version number and salt after
the provided Expiration time has elapsed.

Clients MAY decline to use the provided version number or salt in more than one
connection. It SHOULD do so if its IP address has changed between two connection
attempts. Using a consistent version number can link the client across
connection attempts.

Clients MUST use the same standard version to format the Initial Packet as the
standard version used in the connection that provided the aliased version.

Clients MUST use the provided codepoints to encode the packet type.

If the server provided an ITE, the client MUST append it to any Initial Packet
token it is including from a Retry packet or NEW_TOKEN frame, if it is using
the associated aliased version. If there is no such token, it simply includes
the ITE as the entire token.

When using an aliased version, the client MUST include a aliasing_parameters
transport parameter in its Client Hello.

The QUIC Token Length field MUST include the length of both any Retry or
NEW_TOKEN token and the ITE.

The Length fields of all Initial, Handshake, and 0-RTT packets in the
connection are set to the value described in {{RFC9000}} plus the provided Packet
Length Offset, modulo 2^62.

If a client receives an aliased version number that matches a standard version
that the client supports, it SHOULD assume the server does not support the
standard version and MUST use aliased version behaviors in any connection with
the server using that version number.

If the response to an Initial packet using the provided version is a Version
Negotiation Packet, the client SHOULD assume that the server no longer supports
version aliasing and attempt to connect with one of the advertised versions
(while observing the considerations in {{downgrade}}).

If the response to an Initial packet is a Bad Salt packet, the client follows
the procedures in {{fallback}}.

## The aliasing_parameters Transport Parameter

This transport parameter has the following format. Its provisional type is
0x4150.

~~~
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                           Version (32)                        |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                      Initial Token (variable)                 |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~

The Version field matches the one in the packet header.

The Initial Token field matches the Initial Token in the packet header,
including any Retry token, NEW_TOKEN token, and Initial Token Extension. Its
length is inferred from the specified length of the parameter.

The purpose of this parameter is to validate the contents of these header
fields by including it in the TLS handshake transcript.

A client that receives this transport parameter MUST close the connection with
a TRANSPORT_PARAMETER_ERROR.

# Server Actions on Aliased Version Numbers {#server-actions}

When a server receives a packet with an unsupported version number, it SHOULD
send a Version Negotiation Packet if it is configured not to generate that
version number at random.

Otherwise, when a server receives the first long header packet with an
unsupported version number, it hashes that version number to obtain the packet
type mapping. If the packet is Handshake or Retry, there may have been a loss of
relevant server state; the server discards the packet and SHOULD follow the
procedure in {{fallback}}. If 0RTT, the server MAY either buffer it in
anticipation of a later Initial, or immediately follow the procedure in
{{fallback}}. If buffering, and an Initial packet never arrives, the server
SHOULD follow the procedure in {{fallback}} when discarding any 0RTT packets.

For an Initial packet, it extracts the ITE, if any, and either looks up the
corresponding salt in its database or computes it using the technique originally
used to derive the salt from the version number and ITE.

The server similarly obtains the Packet Length Offset and subtracts it from the
provided Length field, modulo 2^62. If the resulting value is larger than the
entire UDP datagram, the server discards the packet and SHOULD follow the
procedure in {{fallback}}. The server MAY apply further checks (e.g. against the
minimum QUIC packet length) to further reduce the very small probability of a
false positive.

If the server supports multiple standard versions, it uses the standard version
extracted by the ITE or stored in the mapping to parse the decrypted packet.

In all packets with long headers, the server uses the aliased version number
and adds the Packet Length Offset to the length field.

In the extremely unlikely event that the Packet Length Offset resulted in a
legal value but the salt is incorrect, the packet may fail authentication. The
server should drop these packets in case this is the result of packet corruption
along the path.

To reduce linkability for the client, servers SHOULD provide a new Version Alias
transport parameter, with a new version number, ITE, salt, and Packet Length
Offset, each time a client connects. However, issuing version numbers to a
client SHOULD be rate-limited to mitigate the salt polling attack
{{salt-polling}} and MAY cease to clients that are consistently connecting with
standard versions.

If there is no aliasing_parameters transport parameter, or the contents do not
match the fields in the Initial header, the server MUST terminate the
connection with a TRANSPORT_PARAMETER_ERROR.

# Fallback {#fallback}

If the server has lost its encryption state, it may not be able to generate
the correct salts from previously provided versions and ITEs. The fallback
mechanism provides a means of recovering from this state while protecting
against injection of messages by attackers.

When the packet length computation in {{server-actions}} fails, it signals
either that the packet has been corrupted in transit, or the client is using a
transport parameter issued before a server failure. In either case, the server
sends a Bad Salt packet.

## Bad Salt Packets

The Bad Salt packet has a long header and a reserved version number, because it
must not be confused with a legitimate packet in any standard version. They are
not encrypted, not authenticated, and have the following format:

~~~
Bad Salt Packet {
    Header Form (1) = 1,
    Unused (7),
    Version (32) = TBD (provisional value = 0x56415641),
    Destination Connection ID Length (8),
    Destination Connection ID (0..2040),
    Source Connection ID Length (8),
    Source Connection ID (0..2040),
    Supported Version (32) ...,
    Integrity Tag (128),
}
~~~

Unused: The unused field is filled randomly by the sender and ignored on
receipt.

Version: The version field is reserved for use by the Bad Salt packet.

Destination and Source Connection IDs and Lengths: These fields are copied from
the client packet, with the source fields from the client packet written into
the destination fields of the Bad Salt, and vice versa.

Supported Version: A list of standard QUIC version numbers which the server
supports. The number of versions is inferred from the length of the datagram.

Integrity Tag: To compute the integrity tag, the server creates a pseudo-packet
by contents of the entire client Initial UDP payload, including any coalesced
packets, with the Bad Salt packet:

~~~
Bad Salt Pseudo-Packet {
    Client UDP Payload (9600..),
    Header Form (1) = 1,
    Unused (7),
    Version (32) = TBD (provisional value = 0x56415641),
    Destination Connection ID Length (8),
    Destination Connection ID (0..2040),
    Source Connection ID Length (8),
    Source Connection ID (0..2040),
    Supported Version (32) ...,
}
~~~

In a process similar to the Retry Integrity Tag, the Bad Salt Integrity Tag is
computed as the output of AEAD_AES_128_GCM with the following inputs:

* The secret key, K, is 0xbe0c690b9f66575a1d766b54e368c84e.

* The nonce, N, is 0x461599d35d632bf2239825bb.

* The plaintext, P, is empty.

* The associated data, A, is the Bad Salt pseudo-packet.

These values are derived using HKDF-Expand-Label from the secret
0x767fedaff519a2aad117d8fd3ce0a04178ed205ab0d43425723e436853c4b3e2 and labels
"quicva key" and "quicva iv".

The integrity tag serves to validate the integrity of both the Bad Salt packet
itself and the Initial packet that triggered it.

## Client Response to Bad Salt

Upon receipt of a Bad Salt packet, the client SHOULD wait for a Probe Timeout
(PTO) to check if the Bad Salt packet was injected by an attacker, and a valid
response arrives from the actual server.

After waiting, the client checks the Integrity Tag using its record of the
Initial it sent. If this fails, the client SHOULD assume packet corruption and
resend the Initial packet.

If the verification succeeds, the client SHOULD attempt to connect with one of
the listed standard versions. It SHOULD observe the privacy considerations in
{{first-connection}}. It MUST include a version_aliasing_fallback Transport
Parameter in the Client Hello.

Once it sends this transport parameter, the client MUST NOT attempt to connect
with that aliased version again.

The original Client Initial is not part of the new connection. Therefore, the
Connection IDs can change, and the original client hello is not part of the
transcript for TLS key derivation.

## version_aliasing_fallback Transport Parameter

The client sends this transport parameter in a TLS Client Hello generated in
response to a Bad Salt packet:

~~~
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                     Aliased Version (32)                      |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                            Salt (160)                         |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+                   Bad Salt Integrity Tag (128)                +
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                      Initial Token (variable)                 |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~

The Aliased Version, Salt, and Initial Token fields are taken from the
connection attempt that triggered this fallback. The length of the
Initial Token is inferred from the Transport Parameter's overall length.

The Bad Salt Integrity Tag comes from is taken from the Bad Salt packet that
triggered this fallback. Its purpose is to include the Bad Salt packet contents
in the TLS handshake hash.


## Server Response to version_aliasing_fallback Transport Parameter

A client version_aliasing_fallback transport parameter tells the server that the
client received a Bad Salt packet. The server checks if using the version and
ITE as inputs results in the same salt.

If the salt does not match, the server SHOULD continue with the connection and
SHOULD issue a new version_aliasing transport parameter.

If the salt and Packet Length Offset are valid, the server MUST terminate the
connection with the error code INVALID_BAD_SALT.

Note that the client never sends this transport parameter with an aliased
version. A server that receives such a packet MUST terminate the connection with
a TRANSPORT_PARAMETER_ERROR.

# Considerations for Retry Packets

QUIC Retry packets reduce the load on servers during periods of stress by
forcing the client to prove it possesses the IP address before the server
decrypts any Initial Packets or establishes any connection state. Version
aliasing substantially complicates the process.

If a server has to send a Retry packet, the required format is ambiguous without
understanding which standard version to use. If all supported standard versions
use the same Retry format, it simply uses that format with the client-provided
version number.

If the supported standard versions use different Retry formats, the server
obtains the standard version via lookup or decoding and formats a Retry
containing the aliased version number accordingly.

Servers generate the Retry Integrity Tag of a Retry Packet using the procedure
in Section 5.8 of {{RFC9001}}. However, for aliased versions, the secret key K
uses the first 16 octets of the aliased salt instead of the key provided in the
specification.

Clients MUST ignore Retry packets that contain a QUIC version other than the
version it used in its Initial Packet.

Servers MUST NOT reply to a packet with an incorrect Length field in its long
header with a Retry packet; it SHOULD reply with Bad Salt as described above.

# Security and Privacy Considerations

This document intends to improve the existing security and privacy properties of
QUIC by dramatically improving the secrecy of QUIC Initial Packets. However,
there are new attacks against this mechanism.

## Endpoint Impersonation {#impersonation}

An on-path attacker might respond to an Initial Packet with a standard version
with a Version Aliasing Transport Parameter that then caused the client to
reveal sensitive information in a subsequent Initial.

As described in {{client-behavior}}, clients cannot use the contents of a
Version Aliasing transport parameter until they have authenticated the source
as a trusted domain, and have verified that the 1RTT key derivation is
identical at both endpoints.

## First-Connection Privacy {#first-connection}

As version aliasing requires one connection over a standard QUIC version to
acquire initial state, this initial connection leaks some information about
the true target.

The client MAY alter its Initial Packet to sanitize sensitive information and
obtain another aliased version before proceeding with its true request. However,
the client Initial must lead to the authentication of a domain name the client
trusts to provide accurate Version Aliasing information (possibly the
public_name from an Encrypted Client Hello configuration from {{ECHO}}). Advice
for the Outer ClientHello in Section 10.5 of {{ECHO}} applies here.

Endpoints are encouraged to instead use {{ECHO}} or {{QUIC-PI}} to increase
privacy on the first connection between a client and server.

## Forcing Downgrade {#downgrade}

An attacker can attempt to force a client to send an Initial that uses a
standard version by injecting a Version Negotiation packet (which implies the
server no longer supports aliasing) or a Bad Salt packet (which implies the
server has a new cryptographic context).

The weak form of this attack observes the Initial and injects the Version
Negotiation or Bad Salt packet, but cannot drop the Initial. To counteract this,
a client SHOULD NOT respond to these packets until they have waited for Probe
Timeout (PTO) for a valid server Initial to arrive.

The strong form features an attacker that can drop Initial packets. In this
case, the client can either abandon the connection attempt or connect with an
standard version.

If it connects with a standard version, it should consider the privacy advice
in {{first-connection}}.

Furthermore, if it received a Bad Salt packet, the client sends a Version
Aliasing transport parameter to detect the downgrade attack, and the server will
terminate the connection if the Bad Salt packet was an attack.

If the client received a Version Negotiation packet, it MUST implement a
downgrade detection mechanism such as {{!I-D.ietf-quic-version-negotiation}} or
abandon the connection attempt. If it subsequent detects a downgrade detection,
or discovers that the server does not support the same mechanism, it terminates
the connection attempt.

## Initial Packet Injection

QUIC version 1 handshakes are vulnerable to DoS from observers for the short
interval that endpoints keep Initial keys (usually ~1.5 RTTS), since Initial
Packets are not authenticated. With version aliasing, attackers do not have
the necessary keys to launch such an attack.

## Retry Injection {#retry-injection}

QUIC Version 1 Retry packets are spoofable, as they follow a fixed format, are
sent in plaintext, and the integrity protection uses a widely known key. As a
result, QUIC Version 1 has verification mechanisms in subsequent packets of the
connection to validate the origin of the Retry.

Version aliasing largely frustrates this attack. As the integrity check key is
derived from the secret salt, packets from attackers will fail their integrity
check and the client will ignore them.

The Packet Length Offset is important in this framework. Without this
mechanism, servers would have to perform trial decryption to verify the client
was using the correct salt. As this does not occur before sending Retry
Packets, servers would not detect disagreement on the salt beforehand and would
send a Retry packet signed with a different salt than the client expects.
Therefore, a client that received a Retry packet with an invalid integrity
check would not be able to distinguish between the following possibilities:

* a Retry packet corrupted in the network, which should be ignored;
* a Retry packet generated by an attacker, which should be ignored; or
* a Retry packet from a server that lost its cryptographic state, meaning that
further communication with aliased versions is impossible and the client should
revert to using a standard version.

The Packet Length Offset introduces sufficient entropy to make the third
possibility exceedingly unlikely.

## Increased Linkability

As each version number and ITE is unique to each client, if a client uses one
twice, those two connections are extremely likely to be from the same host. If
the client has changed IP address, this is a significant increase in linkability
relative to QUIC with a standard version numbers.

## Salt Polling {#salt-polling}

Observers that wish to decode Initial Packets might open a large number of
connections to the server in an effort to obtain part of the mapping of version
numbers and ITEs to salts for a server. While storage-intensive, this attack
could increase the probability that at least some version-aliased connections
are observable. There are three mitigations servers can execute against this
attack:

* use a longer ITE to increase the entropy of the salt,
* rate-limit transport parameters sent to a particular client, and/or
* set a low expiration time to reduce the lifetime of the attacker's database.

Segmenting the version number space based on client information, i.e. using only
a subset of version numbers for a certain IP address range, would significantly
amplify an attack. Observers will generally be on the path to the client and be
able to mimic having an identical IP address. Segmentation in this way would
dramatically reduce the search space for attackers. Thus, servers are prohibited
from using this mechanism.

## Server Fingerprinting

The server chooses its own ITE length, and the length of this ITE is likely to
be discoverable to an observer. Therefore, the destination server of a client
Initial packet might be decipherable with an ITE length along with other
observables. A four-octet ITE is RECOMMENDED. Deviations from this value should
be carefully considered in light of this property.

Servers with acute needs for higher or lower entropy than provided by a four-
octet ITE are RECOMMENDED to converge on common lengths to reduce the
uniqueness of their signatures.

## Increased Processing of Garbage UDP Packets

As QUIC shares the UDP protocol number with other UDP applications, in some
deployments it may be possible for traffic intended for other UDP applications
to arrive at a QUIC server endpoint. When servers support a finite set of
version numbers, a valid version number field is a strong indicator the packet
is, in fact, QUIC. If the version number is invalid, a QUIC Version Negotiation
is a low-cost response that triggers very early in packet processing.

However, a server that provides version aliasing is prepared to accept almost
any version number. As a result, many more sufficiently sized UDP payloads with
the first bit set to '1' are potential QUIC Initial Packets that require
computation of a salt and Packet Length Offset.

Note that a nonzero Packet Length Offset will allow the server to drop all but
approximately 1 in every 2^49 packets, so trial decryption is unnecessary.

While not a more potent attack then simply sending valid Initial Packets,
servers may have to provision additional resources to address this possibility.

## Increased Retry Overhead

This document requires two small cryptographic operations to build a Retry
packet instead of one, placing more load on servers when already under load.

## Request Forgery

Section 21.4 of {{RFC9000}} describes the request forgery attack, where a QUIC
endpoint can cause its peer to deliver packets to a victim with specific content.

Version aliasing allows the server to specify the contents of the version field
and part of the token field in Initial packets sent by the client, potentially
increasing the potency of this attack.

# IANA Considerations

## QUIC Version Registry

This document request that IANA add the following entry to the QUIC version
registry:

Value: TBD

Status: permanent

Specification: This document

Change Controller: IETF

Contact: QUIC WG

## QUIC Transport Parameter Registry

This document requests that IANA add the following entries to the QUIC
Transport Parameters Registry:

| Value | Parameter Name | Specification |
| :---: | :---: | :---: |
| TBD | version_aliasing | This Document |
| TBD | aliasing_parameters | This Document |
| TBD | version_aliasing_fallback | This Document |

## QUIC Transport Error Codes Registry

This document requests that IANA add the following entry to the QUIC Transport
Error Codes registry:

Value: TBD (provisional: 0x4942)

Code: INVALID_BAD_SALT

--- back

# Acknowledgments

Marten Seemann was the original creator of the version aliasing approach.

# Change Log

> **RFC Editor's Note:** Please remove this section prior to
> publication of a final version of this document.

## since draft-duke-quic-version-aliasing-07

* Added the Bad Salt Integrity Tag to the transport parameter
* Greased packet types

## since draft-duke-quic-version-aliasing-05

* Revised security considerations
* Discussed multiple SNIs behind one load balancer
* Removed VN from the fallback mechanism

## since draft-duke-quic-version-aliasing-04

* Relationship with Encrypted Client Hello (ECH) and QUIC Protected Initials
* Corrected statement about version negotiation

## since draft-duke-quic-version-aliasing-03

* Discussed request forgery attacks

## since draft-duke-quic-version-aliasing-02

* Specified 0RTT status of the transport parameter

## since draft-duke-quic-version-aliasing-01

* Fixed all references to "seed" where I meant "salt."
* Added the Packet Length Offset, which eliminates Retry Injection Attacks

## since draft-duke-quic-version-aliasing-00

* Added "Initial Token Extensions" to increase salt entropy and make salt
polling attacks impractical.
* Allowed servers to store a mapping of version number and ITE to salt instead.
* Made standard version encoding mandatory. This dramatically simplifies the new
Retry logic and changes the security model.
* Added references to Version Negotiation Transport Parameters.
* Extensive readability edit.
